---
layout: post
title: "AppWeek"
date: 2009-06-12
comments: false
---

[Shawn's AppWeek post][1] inspired me to write one too. AppWeek is our chance
to be creators for a little while and it was a lot of fun. I didn't set out to
build something nearly as ambitious as "Super Avatar Sample Smashup EXTREME! -
'Capture the Cat' edition", but I did get to take a swing at a game I've wanted
to build for a while: ~~Rock'em Sock'em Avatars~~ Avatar Boxing. Avatars, being
a new feature in this release, were an unwritten requirement for all of the
AppWeek games. Between SASSECTCE, my game, and the many others, Avatars were
chasing cats, beating each other up, play futuristic sports, falling off
buildings, dancing in a cloud of gems, being launched from canons to save the
world, and much more. All this excitement was almost too much for a bunch of
exhausted engineers, but that's what the beer was for during the game
unveilings.

Here's what the game looked like with the basic animations wired up. You'll
notice that the avatars have been hitting the gym. That's because their arms
were too short to reach each other! I added a little extra bulk because I was
laughing too hard not to. I directly bound the game pad triggers to the
shoulder and elbow joints and rigged up the chase camera sample to inspect my
work. There wasn't much game play yet, but it was already fun. That's always a
good sign.

> IMAGES MISSING :-(

Even with just one week, I decided to invest some time into debugging
visualizations. That turned out to be a really great idea.

> IMAGE MISSING :-(

Then, I added some collision spheres for the heads, hands, and upper bodies.
This was a hacky, trial and error process. Thankfully, C# compiles quickly.

> IMAGES MISSING :-(

At this point, I spent an entire day working on the physics. I wanted the
avatars to bounce/wobble when they got hit, so I rigged up some complex spring
systems. Things were starting to work, but I'm generally pretty bad at this
sort of thing and my simulation routinely exploded. The avatars arms went
shooting off into space and I was getting pretty frustrated. No screen shots of
that chaos because I am embarrassed.

With half a day to go, I added the obligatory damage bars and some rudimentary
hand-to-head collision detection.

> IMAGE MISSING :-(

I was feeling pretty good about the game, despite my physics failures, it was
pretty fun anyway. I wondered down the hall to chat with Jace, who had just
added sound effects to his game. His game was hilarious before, but the sound
effects were *priceless*. I ejected the sound effect CD out of his machine,
yoinked it, and took off running. An hour later (and 10 minutes *after* the
deadline), my game had some sweet punch and miss sounds. I also made the
avatars' heads pop up when their damage bar was full, accompanied by an awesome
zip-tie sound.

> IMAGE MISSING :-(

At our team happy hour, I'd like to think Avatar Boxing was a fan favorite. I
certainly had fun making it! I hope everyone enjoys Avatar support in the new
XNA Game Studio.

## Imported Comments

### Danny Tuppeny

I really wish you guys were releasing these games - they sound so funny and it
would be great to see how you did some of the stuff with Avatars.

### Brandon Bloom

As Shawn said: "We did an AppWeek shortly before shipping Game Studio 1.0,
which produced minigames by Dean and Minjie, plus a bunch of stuff that was too
unfinished or too much of an IP violation to release."

Believe me, the code for my game isn't remotely useful :-) Hacks upon kludges
upon hacks galore. It would be a significant chunk of work to turn it into
something educational. Even if it was interesting, it is technically not mine
to release.  It would be a conflict of interest to publish it on Xbox LIVE
Indie Games, since I created it during the course of my job.

Since our games are only being seen by the team, many developers use
copyrighted assets in the interest of time. Fair use allows us to show them at
our happy hour, but someone would certainly come knocking if we released them.
It is very expensive to clean that up because now you need to involve artists
and rework the code for the new art (AppWeek games aren't robust, art changes
are breaking).

Everyone would love to share, but it isn't universally practical.  Luckily,
several cool Avatar-centric samples were inspired by app week, so we will have
something to share. I'll also see about recording some videos of the IP-safe
games...

### Danny Tuppeny

No worries, it makes sense. I'm sure we'll see more Avatar samples soon
that aren't hacked together we can learn from :-D

### Kyle

This looks like it could be turned into a real fun game. It's too bad that we
can't buff our Avatars up like this =(

### Brandon Bloom

Yeah, sadly it appears that scaling individual body parts is against the rules
(which were unwritten when I did this project). I believe the motivation is for
accommodating future avatar accessories which might look awful with unknown
joint transforms. Don't quote me on that :-)

[1]: http://blogs.msdn.com/shawnhar/archive/2009/06/12/appweek.aspx
