---
layout: post
title: "SemVer: A Technical Solution to a Social Problem"
date: 2013-06-19 11:35
comments: true
categories: 
---

"Semantic Versioning", commonly called [SemVer][1], is a specification for
assigning and reasoning about software version numbers. In short, it codifies
some common practices regarding `$MAJOR.$MINOR.$REVISION` style version
numbers, including guarentees about API compatibility and dependency
resolution.

Beautifully simple semantics, outlined by a clear and concise specification.
What's not to like? Technically, SemVer is very strong. However, statistically
speaking, software developers can not be trusted to maintain the semantics
promised by SemVer. A small handful of individuals and projects use SemVer, or
something like it, to good effect. The rest can't be trusted not to introduce
major bugs or breaking changes with each and every revision.

Every engineer who has ever worked on a project with more than a handful of
external dependencies has had the horrifying experience of deploying some small
dependency upgrades only to have their entire house of cards come crashing
down. As a result, mature organizations tend to maintain their own package
repositories, vendor all dependencies, or otherwise carefully scrutinize and
control each and every external component.

Packaging systems such as Ruby's [Bundler][2] and Node's [NPM][3] often default
to or otherwise encourage SemVer. Depending on a
[pessimistic version constraint][4], such as `~> 1.2`, is tantamount to saying
"I trust that the maintainer of this project both understands SemVer and is
capable of enforcing its guarantees." Sadly, this is rarely, if ever, true.

Versioning is a social contract. A maintainer makes a promise regarding API
stability and versioning policy. Consumers make a judgement call regarding the
veracity of the maintainer's promise. If the README file says "This project uses
SemVer" and the project's maintainer is [Tom Preston-Werner][5], then you can
trust that pessimistic version constraint in your dependencies file.

However, the README might say "Releases are only packaged for long-term support
versions.  Please use the `stable` branch for new production systems." In such
a case, you might want to consider depending directly on that branch or even on
a particular commit hash. Speaking of branches and commits, this calls to mind
a far preferable default for packaging and dependency resolution systems:
[refspecs][6]. It would be great if the SemVer spec was updated to include
policies for defining branch and tag names in your version control system of
choice. Instead of depending on `~> 1.2`, you could depend on
`branches/v1.2.x`. This grants maintainers greater flexibility in making social
contracts.  It also grants consumers greater control over how much trust they
give to maintainers.

[1]: http://semver.org/
[2]: http://gembundler.com/
[3]: https://npmjs.org/
[4]: http://docs.rubygems.org/read/chapter/16#page74
[5]: http://tom.preston-werner.com/
[6]: https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/gitrevisions.html
